README.md, before:

# PSR-16 Simple Cache

| GitHub Action | Travis CI |  Scrutinizer CI | Code Coverage | Code Quality |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ![build](https://github.com/terrylinooo/simple-cache/workflows/build/badge.svg?branch=master) | [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/terrylinooo/simple-cache.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/terrylinooo/simple-cache) | [![Build Status](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/build.png?b=master)](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/build-status/master) |  [![codecov](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/coverage.png?b=master)](https://codecov.io/gh/terrylinooo/simple-cache) |  [![Scrutinizer Code Quality](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/quality-score.png?b=master)](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/?branch=master)

PSR-16 simple cache drivers for PHP.

***Showcase***

Simple Cache is used in [Cache Master](https://github.com/terrylinooo/cache-master), a [WordPress Cache Plugin](https://wordpress.org/plugins/cache-master/), and works great. Check it out if you are running WordPress sites, it will not let you down.

#### Built-in drivers:

The required parameters are marked by an asterisk (*)

| Driver name | `($driver)`| PHP modules | `($config)`
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| File | `file` | - | `*storage` |
| Redis | `redis` | redis |  `host`, `port`, `user`, `pass` |
| MongoDB | `mongo` | mongodb | `host`, `port`, `user`, `pass`, `dbname`, `collection` |
| MySQL | `mysql` | pdo_mysql | `host`, `port`, `*user`, `*pass`, `*dbname`, `table`, `charset` |
| SQLite | `sqlite` | pdo_sqlite | `*storage` |
| APC | `apc` | apc | - |
| APCu | `apcu` | apcu | - |
| Memcache | `memcache` | memcache | `host`, `port` |
| LibMemcached | `memcached` | memcached | `host`, `port` |
| WinCache | `wincache` | wincache | - |

Note: **WinCache** is excluded from unit testing since it's only used on Windows, and the testing processes are done on Linux environment.

This command will show a list of the installed PHP modules.

```bash
php -m
```
Before you use, make sure you have the required PHP modules installed on the system.

---

## Table of Contents

- Install
- Usage
    - Cache
        - Built-in drivers
        - __construct
        - $driver
        - $config
- API
    - set
    - get
    - has
    - delete
    - getMultiple
    - setMultiple
    - deleteMultiple
    - clear
    - clearExpiredItems `(Non-PSR-16)`
- Build Data Schema
    - MySQL
    - SQLite
- Garbage Collection
- Author
- License

---

## Install

```bash
composer require shieldon/simple-cache
```

## Usage

### `Cache`

Class `Cache` is an adapter that not only allows the implemented instance of `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`, but also has built-in drivers already.

####  __construct(`$driver = ''`, `$config = []`)

Create a cache handler using the file driver.

Example:

```php
$driver = new \Shieldon\SimpleCache\Cache('file', [
    'storage' => __DIR__ . '/../tmp'
]);
```

#### `$driver`

(string|CacheInterface)

The class name of a built-in driver, or a PSR-16 driver that implements `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`.

#### `$config`

(array)

An array of parameters will be passed to a built-in driver.

Example:

*Redis*
```php
$config = [
    'host' => '127.0.0.1',
    'port' => 6379,
    'user' => null,
    'pass' => null,
];
```

*File*
```php
$config = [
    'storage' => '/tmp/simple-cache',
];
```

*Mysql*
```php
$config = [
    'host'    => '127.0.0.1',
    'port'    => 3306,
    'user'    => null,
    'pass'    => null,
    'dbname'  => null,
    'table'   => 'cache_data',
    'charset' => 'utf8'
];
```

*Sqlite*
```php
$config = [
    'storage' => '/tmp/simple-cache',
];
```

*Mongo*
```php
$config = [
    'host'       => '127.0.0.1',
    'port'       => 27017,
    'user'       => null,
    'pass'       => null,
    'database'   => 'test',
    'collection' => 'cache_data',
];
```

*Memcache*, *Memcached*
```php
$config = [
    'host' => '127.0.0.1',
    'port' => 11211,
];
```

---

## API

Those API methods are defined on `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`. Please check out the [PSR-16 document](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-16/) to get the detailed explanation.

- set
- get
- has
- delete
- setMultiple
- getMultiple
- deleteMultiple
- clear
- clearExpiredItems *(Non-PSR-16)*

### set

```php
public function set(string $key, mixed value, $ttl = null);
```

Note that **$ttl** accepts `null`,`int`,`DateInterval`.
The `null` means that the key never expires until deleted.

Example:

```php
$cache->set('foo', 'bar', 300);
$cache->set('foo2', 'bar2');

$array = [
    'hello' => 'world',
    'yes' => 'Taiwan',
];

$cache->set('foo3', $array);
$cache->set('foo4', $array, 300);
```

### get

```php
public function get(string $key, mixed $default = null): mixed
```

Example:

```php
echo $cache->get('foo', 'placeholder');
// bar

sleep(301);

echo $cache->get('foo', 'placeholder');
// placeholder

echo $cache->get('foo');
// null

echo $cache->get('foo2', 'placeholder');
// bar2

$example = $cache->get('foo3', 'placeholder');
var_dump($example);
// string(11) "placeholder"

$example = $cache->get('foo4', 'placeholder');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(2) {
    ["hello"]=>
    string(5) "world"
    ["yes"]=>
    string(6) "Taiwan"
    }
*/
```

### has

```php
public function has(string $key): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->has('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 exists.';
} else {
    echo 'foo3 does not exist.';
}
// foo3 exists.
```

### delete

```php
public function delete(string $key): bool
```

Example:

```php

if ($cache->delete('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 has been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete key foo3.';
}
// foo3 has been deleted successfully.

if ($cache->has('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 exists.';
} else {
    echo 'foo3 does not exist.';
}
// foo3 does not exist.
```

### setMultiple

```php
public function setMultiple(iterable $values, $ttl = null): bool
```

Note that **$ttl** accepts `null`,`int`,`DateInterval`.
The `null` means that the key never expires until deleted.

Example:

```php
$array = [
    'bar' => 'foo',
    'bar2' => 'foo2',
];

$cache->setMultiple($array, 300);
```

### getMultiple

```php
public function getMultiple(array $keys, mixed $default = null): iterable
```

Example:

```php
$example = $cache->getMultiple(['bar', 'bar2', 'bar3'], 'hello');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(3) {
    ["bar"]=>
    string(3) "foo"
    ["bar2"]=>
    string(4) "foo2"
    ["bar3"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    }
*/
```

### deleteMultiple

```php
public function deleteMultiple(array $keys): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->deleteMultiple(['bar', 'bar2'])) {
    echo 'bar and bar2 have been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete keys bar or bar2.';
}
// bar and bar2 have been deleted successfully.

$example = $cache->getMultiple(['bar', 'bar2', 'bar3'], 'hello');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(3) {
    ["bar"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    ["bar2"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    ["bar3"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    }
*/
```

### clear

```php
public function clear(): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->clear()) {
    echo 'All cached data has been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete the cached data.';
}
// All cached data has been deleted successfully.
```

### clearExpiredItems `Non-PSR-16`

```php
public function clearExpiredItems(): array
```

This method will return a list of the removed cache keys.

*Note*: **Redis** and **Memcache**, **Memcached** drivers will always return an empty array. See *Garbage Collection* section below.

Example:

```php
$cache->set('foo', 'bar', 300);
$cache->set('foo2', 'bar2', 5);
$cache->set('foo3', 'bar3', 5);

sleep(6);

$expiredItems = $cache->clearExpiredItems();
var_dump($expiredItems);

/* 
    array(2) {
    [0]=>
    string(4) "foo2"
    [1]=>
    string(4) "foo3"
    }
*/
```

---

## Build Data Schema

For the first time of the use of the MySQL and SQLite drivers, the data schema is needed to build.

You can use this API to make it.

```php
$cache->rebuild();
```

Or build it manually.

### MySQL

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS `cache_data` (
    `cache_key` varchar(40) NOT NULL,
    `cache_value` longtext,
    PRIMARY KEY (`cache_key`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4;
```

### SQLite

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS cache_data (
    cache_key VARCHAR(40) PRIMARY KEY,
    cache_value LONGTEXT
);
```

---

## Garbage Collection

For built-in drivers, you can enable the garbage collection to clear expired cache from your system automatically.

Use those parameters:
```php
$config = [
    'gc_enable'      => true,
    'gc_divisor'     => 100, // default
    'gc_probability' => 1, // default
];
```
It means there will be a `1%` chance of performing the garbage collection.
Do not use it as 100% chance becasue it will fetch all keys and check them one by one, totally unnecessary. 

Example:
```php
$driver = new \Shieldon\SimpleCache\Cache('file', [
    'storage'   => __DIR__ . '/../tmp',
    'gc_enable' => true,
]);
```

You can just use the `gc_enable` to enable garbage collection.

### Note

For **Redis** and **Memcache**, **Memcached** drivers, there is no need to use this method becasue that the expired items will be cleared automatically.



---

## Author

- [Terry L.](https://terryl.in/) from Tainan, Taiwan.

#### The story about this library

This PHP library was born for the [12th Iornman Game](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/2020-12th-ironman) contest hosted by [ITHelp](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/), an IT community in Taiwan. I named my topic as "*Road to PHP Master - The Best Practice in Open Souce Code.*", written in traditional Chinese. [Read here](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/users/20111119/ironman/3269), if you're interested.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add "unix_socket" setting for Reids, MongoDB, Memcache and Memcached drivers.

README.md, after:

# PSR-16 Simple Cache

| GitHub Action | Travis CI |  Scrutinizer CI | Code Coverage | Code Quality |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ![build](https://github.com/terrylinooo/simple-cache/workflows/build/badge.svg?branch=master) | [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/terrylinooo/simple-cache.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/terrylinooo/simple-cache) | [![Build Status](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/build.png?b=master)](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/build-status/master) |  [![codecov](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/coverage.png?b=master)](https://codecov.io/gh/terrylinooo/simple-cache) |  [![Scrutinizer Code Quality](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/badges/quality-score.png?b=master)](https://scrutinizer-ci.com/g/terrylinooo/simple-cache/?branch=master)

PSR-16 simple cache drivers for PHP.

***Showcase***

Simple Cache is used in [Cache Master](https://github.com/terrylinooo/cache-master), a [WordPress Cache Plugin](https://wordpress.org/plugins/cache-master/), and works great. Check it out if you are running WordPress sites, it will not let you down.

#### Built-in drivers:

The required parameters are marked by an asterisk (*)

| Driver name | `($driver)`| PHP modules | `($config)`
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| File | `file` | - | `*storage` |
| Redis | `redis` | redis |  `host`, `port`, `user`, `pass`, `unix_socket` |
| MongoDB | `mongo` | mongodb | `host`, `port`, `user`, `pass`, `dbname`, `collection`, `unix_socket` |
| MySQL | `mysql` | pdo_mysql | `host`, `port`, `*user`, `*pass`, `*dbname`, `table`, `charset` |
| SQLite | `sqlite` | pdo_sqlite | `*storage` |
| APC | `apc` | apc | - |
| APCu | `apcu` | apcu | - |
| Memcache | `memcache` | memcache | `host`, `port`, `unix_socket` |
| LibMemcached | `memcached` | memcached | `host`, `port`, `unix_socket` |
| WinCache | `wincache` | wincache | - |

Note: 

- **WinCache** is excluded from unit testing since it's only used on Windows, and the testing processes are done on Linux environment.
- `unix_socket` is empty by default, accepting the absolute path of the unix domain socket file. If it is set, `host` and `port` will be ignored.

This command will show a list of the installed PHP modules.

```bash
php -m
```
Before you use, make sure you have the required PHP modules installed on the system.

---

## Table of Contents

- Install
- Usage
    - Cache
        - Built-in drivers
        - __construct
        - $driver
        - $config
- API
    - set
    - get
    - has
    - delete
    - getMultiple
    - setMultiple
    - deleteMultiple
    - clear
    - clearExpiredItems `(Non-PSR-16)`
- Build Data Schema
    - MySQL
    - SQLite
- Garbage Collection
- Author
- License

---

## Install

```bash
composer require shieldon/simple-cache
```

## Usage

### `Cache`

Class `Cache` is an adapter that not only allows the implemented instance of `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`, but also has built-in drivers already.

####  __construct(`$driver = ''`, `$config = []`)

Create a cache handler using the file driver.

Example:

```php
$driver = new \Shieldon\SimpleCache\Cache('file', [
    'storage' => __DIR__ . '/../tmp'
]);
```

#### `$driver`

(string|CacheInterface)

The class name of a built-in driver, or a PSR-16 driver that implements `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`.

#### `$config`

(array)

An array of parameters will be passed to a built-in driver.

Example:

*Redis*
```php
$config = [
    'host' => '127.0.0.1',
    'port' => 6379,
    'user' => null,
    'pass' => null,
];
```

*File*
```php
$config = [
    'storage' => '/tmp/simple-cache',
];
```

*Mysql*
```php
$config = [
    'host'    => '127.0.0.1',
    'port'    => 3306,
    'user'    => null,
    'pass'    => null,
    'dbname'  => null,
    'table'   => 'cache_data',
    'charset' => 'utf8'
];
```

*Sqlite*
```php
$config = [
    'storage' => '/tmp/simple-cache',
];
```

*Mongo*
```php
$config = [
    'host'       => '127.0.0.1',
    'port'       => 27017,
    'user'       => null,
    'pass'       => null,
    'database'   => 'test',
    'collection' => 'cache_data',
];
```

*Memcache*, *Memcached*
```php
$config = [
    'host' => '127.0.0.1',
    'port' => 11211,
];
```

---

## API

Those API methods are defined on `Psr\SimpleCache\CacheInterface`. Please check out the [PSR-16 document](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-16/) to get the detailed explanation.

- set
- get
- has
- delete
- setMultiple
- getMultiple
- deleteMultiple
- clear
- clearExpiredItems *(Non-PSR-16)*

### set

```php
public function set(string $key, mixed value, $ttl = null);
```

Note that **$ttl** accepts `null`,`int`,`DateInterval`.
The `null` means that the key never expires until deleted.

Example:

```php
$cache->set('foo', 'bar', 300);
$cache->set('foo2', 'bar2');

$array = [
    'hello' => 'world',
    'yes' => 'Taiwan',
];

$cache->set('foo3', $array);
$cache->set('foo4', $array, 300);
```

### get

```php
public function get(string $key, mixed $default = null): mixed
```

Example:

```php
echo $cache->get('foo', 'placeholder');
// bar

sleep(301);

echo $cache->get('foo', 'placeholder');
// placeholder

echo $cache->get('foo');
// null

echo $cache->get('foo2', 'placeholder');
// bar2

$example = $cache->get('foo3', 'placeholder');
var_dump($example);
// string(11) "placeholder"

$example = $cache->get('foo4', 'placeholder');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(2) {
    ["hello"]=>
    string(5) "world"
    ["yes"]=>
    string(6) "Taiwan"
    }
*/
```

### has

```php
public function has(string $key): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->has('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 exists.';
} else {
    echo 'foo3 does not exist.';
}
// foo3 exists.
```

### delete

```php
public function delete(string $key): bool
```

Example:

```php

if ($cache->delete('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 has been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete key foo3.';
}
// foo3 has been deleted successfully.

if ($cache->has('foo3')) {
    echo 'foo3 exists.';
} else {
    echo 'foo3 does not exist.';
}
// foo3 does not exist.
```

### setMultiple

```php
public function setMultiple(iterable $values, $ttl = null): bool
```

Note that **$ttl** accepts `null`,`int`,`DateInterval`.
The `null` means that the key never expires until deleted.

Example:

```php
$array = [
    'bar' => 'foo',
    'bar2' => 'foo2',
];

$cache->setMultiple($array, 300);
```

### getMultiple

```php
public function getMultiple(array $keys, mixed $default = null): iterable
```

Example:

```php
$example = $cache->getMultiple(['bar', 'bar2', 'bar3'], 'hello');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(3) {
    ["bar"]=>
    string(3) "foo"
    ["bar2"]=>
    string(4) "foo2"
    ["bar3"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    }
*/
```

### deleteMultiple

```php
public function deleteMultiple(array $keys): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->deleteMultiple(['bar', 'bar2'])) {
    echo 'bar and bar2 have been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete keys bar or bar2.';
}
// bar and bar2 have been deleted successfully.

$example = $cache->getMultiple(['bar', 'bar2', 'bar3'], 'hello');
var_dump($example);
/* 
    array(3) {
    ["bar"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    ["bar2"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    ["bar3"]=>
    string(5) "hello"
    }
*/
```

### clear

```php
public function clear(): bool
```

Example:

```php
if ($cache->clear()) {
    echo 'All cached data has been deleted successfully.';
} else {
    echo 'Failed to delete the cached data.';
}
// All cached data has been deleted successfully.
```

### clearExpiredItems `Non-PSR-16`

```php
public function clearExpiredItems(): array
```

This method will return a list of the removed cache keys.

*Note*: **Redis** and **Memcache**, **Memcached** drivers will always return an empty array. See *Garbage Collection* section below.

Example:

```php
$cache->set('foo', 'bar', 300);
$cache->set('foo2', 'bar2', 5);
$cache->set('foo3', 'bar3', 5);

sleep(6);

$expiredItems = $cache->clearExpiredItems();
var_dump($expiredItems);

/* 
    array(2) {
    [0]=>
    string(4) "foo2"
    [1]=>
    string(4) "foo3"
    }
*/
```

---

## Build Data Schema

For the first time of the use of the MySQL and SQLite drivers, the data schema is needed to build.

You can use this API to make it.

```php
$cache->rebuild();
```

Or build it manually.

### MySQL

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS `cache_data` (
    `cache_key` varchar(40) NOT NULL,
    `cache_value` longtext,
    PRIMARY KEY (`cache_key`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4;
```

### SQLite

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS cache_data (
    cache_key VARCHAR(40) PRIMARY KEY,
    cache_value LONGTEXT
);
```

---

## Garbage Collection

For built-in drivers, you can enable the garbage collection to clear expired cache from your system automatically.

Use those parameters:
```php
$config = [
    'gc_enable'      => true,
    'gc_divisor'     => 100, // default
    'gc_probability' => 1, // default
];
```
It means there will be a `1%` chance of performing the garbage collection.
Do not use it as 100% chance becasue it will fetch all keys and check them one by one, totally unnecessary. 

Example:
```php
$driver = new \Shieldon\SimpleCache\Cache('file', [
    'storage'   => __DIR__ . '/../tmp',
    'gc_enable' => true,
]);
```

You can just use the `gc_enable` to enable garbage collection.

### Note

For **Redis** and **Memcache**, **Memcached** drivers, there is no need to use this method becasue that the expired items will be cleared automatically.



---

## Author

- [Terry L.](https://terryl.in/) from Tainan, Taiwan.

#### The story about this library

This PHP library was born for the [12th Iornman Game](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/2020-12th-ironman) contest hosted by [ITHelp](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/), an IT community in Taiwan. I named my topic as "*Road to PHP Master - The Best Practice in Open Souce Code.*", written in traditional Chinese. [Read here](https://ithelp.ithome.com.tw/users/20111119/ironman/3269), if you're interested.

## License

MIT
